Tweaks to the build instructions (#9235)
endless-sky/endless-sky: docs/readme-cmake.md

# Build instructions

> First you need a copy of the code (if you intend on working on the game use your fork's URL here):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First you need a copy of the code (if you intend on working on the game, use your fork's URL here):
```

# Build instructions

First you need a copy of the code (if you intend on working on the game, use your fork's URL here):

```powershell
> git clone https://github.com/endless-sky/endless-sky
```

The game's root directory, where your `git clone`d files reside, will be your starting point for compiling the game.

> Next, you will need to install a couple of dependencies to build the game. There are several different ways to build Endless Sky, depending on your operating system and preference. As an IDE, we recommend using [Visual Studio Code](#visual-studio-code).

Reviewer: Maybe skip the mention of an IDE at this point?
When reading this, it looks like you're suggesting I follow that link, which takes me to the VSCode section near the end which talks about installing extensions. But, I never installed those dependencies. I don't think it'd be difficult for a new user to end up skipping the installation of the build tools and being very confused when VSCode can't build anything.
Instead of removing it entirely, you could also say something like: "Once you have these dependencies, you can move on to [building the game](link to the building section)."

- [Windows](#windows)
- [Windows (MinGW)](#windows-mingw)
- [MacOS](#macos)
- [Linux](#linux)

## Windows

It is recommended to use the toolchain from Visual Studio to build the game (regardless of the IDE you wish to use).

> Download Visual Studio (if you do not want to install Visual Studio, you can alternatively download the VS Build Tools), and make sure to install the following components:

Reviewer: Links to download pages for Visual Studio itself and acquiring hte build tools separately?

Also, is there a minimum version requirement here and/or on the tools listed below?

# Build instructions

First you need a copy of the code (if you intend on working on the game, use your fork's URL here):

```powershell
> git clone https://github.com/endless-sky/endless-sky
```

The game's root directory, where your `git clone`d files reside, will be your starting point for compiling the game. You can use `cd endless-sky` to enter the game's directory.

Next, you will need to install a couple of dependencies to build the game. There are several different ways to build Endless Sky, depending on your operating system and preference.

- [Windows](#windows)
- [Windows (MinGW)](#windows-mingw)
- [MacOS](#macos)
- [Linux](#linux)

## Installing build dependencies

### Windows

> We recommend to use the toolchain from Visual Studio to build the game (regardless of the IDE you wish to use).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We recommend using the toolchain from Visual Studio to build the game (regardless of the IDE you wish to use).
```

> Download [Visual Studio](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/downloads/#visual-studio-community-2022) (if you do not want to install Visual Studio, you can alternatively download the [VS Build Tools](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/downloads/#build-tools-for-visual-studio-2022)), and make sure to install the following components:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Download [Visual Studio](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/downloads/#visual-studio-community-2022) and make sure to install the components listed below. The "Community" edition is appropriate for working on Endless Sky.
If you do not want to install Visual Studio, you can alternatively download just the [VS Build Tools](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/downloads/#build-tools-for-visual-studio-2022).
```
Or something else, but we should probably give some advice on what edition to choose to make it easier for new users.

Author: better?

- "Desktop Development with C++",
- "C++ Clang Compiler for Windows",
- "C++ CMake tools for Windows".

> We recommend to use at least the version from 2022. If you're unsure which edition to use, use the Community edition.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We recommend using Visual Studio 2022 or newer. If you are unsure of which edition to use, choose Visual Studio Community.
```

### Windows (MinGW)
  
You can download the [MinGW Winlibs](https://winlibs.com/#download-release) build, which also includes various tools you'll need to build the game as well. It is possible to use other MinGW distributions too (like Msys2 for example).

You'll need the POSIX version of MinGW. For the Winlibs distribution mentioned above, the latest version is currently gcc 13 ([direct download link](https://github.com/brechtsanders/winlibs_mingw/releases/download/13.2.0-16.0.6-11.0.0-ucrt-r1/winlibs-x86_64-posix-seh-gcc-13.2.0-mingw-w64ucrt-11.0.0-r1.zip)). Download and extract the zip file in a folder whose path doesn't contain a space (C:\ for example) and add the bin\ folder inside to your PATH (Press the Windows key and type "edit environment variables", then click on PATH and add it to the list).

> You will also need to install a recent version of [CMake](https://cmake.org/download/). You can check if you have CMake already installed by running `cmake -v` in command line window.

Author: >  Is this included in "C++ CMake tools for Windows" or is it separate?

it's included yeah, should I mention this?

> You will also need to install a recent version of [CMake](https://cmake.org/download/). You can check if you have CMake already installed by running `cmake -v` in command line window.

Author: >  Also, is this step required if using the Visual Studio installer to acquire the build tools?

Since this is in the MinGW section, I think we can assume that the user didn't install VS

> You will also need to install a recent version of [CMake](https://cmake.org/download/). You can check if you have CMake already installed by running `cmake -v` in command line window.

Reviewer: If it's included, then I don't think so. I recall we had some people who didn't seem to have CMake after installing Visual Studio and it was unclear if this package actually included all the CMake stuff needed.

> You will also need to install a recent version of [CMake](https://cmake.org/download/). You can check if you have CMake already installed by running `cmake -v` in command line window.

Author: The package does include all the CMake stuff you need, idk what the issue was for those people.

The game's root directory, where your `git clone`d files reside, will be your starting point for compiling the game.

> Next you will need to install a couple of dependencies to build the game. There are several different ways to build Endless Sky, depending on your operating system and preference.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next, you will need to install a couple of dependencies to build the game. There are several different ways to build Endless Sky, depending on your operating system and preference.
```

~~I know the original also said that.~~

- [Windows](#windows)
- [MacOS](#macos)
- [Linux](#linux)

## Windows

It is recommended to use the toolchain from Visual Studio to build the game (regardless of the IDE you wish to use). The other supported toolchain is [MinGW](#mingw).

Download Visual Studio (if you do not want to use Visual Studio, you can alternatively download the VS Build Tools), and make sure to install the following components:

- "Desktop Development with C++",
- "C++ Clang Compiler for Windows",
- "C++ CMake tools for Windows".

Please note that it is recommended to use VS 2022 (or higher) for its better CMake integration.

<details>
<summary>Step-by-step instructions for Visual Studio</summary>

> 1. Open the root folder using Visual Studio ("Open Folder")

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Open the repository's root folder using Visual Studio ("Open Folder")
```

2. Wait while Visual Studio loads everything. This may take a few minutes the first time, but should be relatively fast on subsequent loads.
3. On the toolbar you're able to choose between Debug and Release.
4. You might need to select the target to launch in the dropdown menu of the Run button (it's the one with the green arrow). Select "Endless Sky (build/.../)" (not the one with install).

> 4. Hit the Run button (F5) to build and run the game.

Reviewer: Why are there two step fours?

This will create a Visual Studio 2022 solution. If you are using an older version of VS, you will need to adjust the version. Now you will find a complete solution in the `build/` folder. Find the solution and open it and you're good to go!

#### MinGW
  
You can download the [MinGW Winlibs](https://winlibs.com/#download-release) build, which also includes various tools you'll need to build the game as well. It is possible to use other MinGW distributions too (like Msys2 for example).

> You'll need the POSIX version of MinGW. For the Winlibs distribution mentioned above, the latest version is currently gcc 13 ([direct download link](https://github.com/brechtsanders/winlibs_mingw/releases/download/13.2.0-16.0.6-11.0.0-ucrt-r1/winlibs-x86_64-posix-seh-gcc-13.2.0-mingw-w64ucrt-11.0.0-r1.zip)). Download and extract the zip file in a folder whose path doesn't contain a space (C:\ for example) and add the bin\ folder inside to your PATH (Press the Windows key and type "edit environment variables", then click on PATH and add it in the list).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You'll need the POSIX version of MinGW. For the Winlibs distribution mentioned above, the latest version is currently gcc 13 ([direct download link](https://github.com/brechtsanders/winlibs_mingw/releases/download/13.2.0-16.0.6-11.0.0-ucrt-r1/winlibs-x86_64-posix-seh-gcc-13.2.0-mingw-w64ucrt-11.0.0-r1.zip)). Download and extract the zip file in a folder whose path doesn't contain a space (C:\ for example) and add the bin\ folder inside to your PATH (Press the Windows key and type "edit environment variables", then click on PATH and add it to the list).
```

You will also need to install [CMake](https://cmake.org/download/) (if you don't already have it).

## MacOS

Install [Homebrew](https://brew.sh). Once it is installed, use it to install the tools and libraries you will need:

```bash
$ brew install cmake ninja mad libpng jpeg-turbo sdl2 openal-soft
```

**Note**: If you are on Apple Silicon (and want to compile for ARM), make sure that you are using ARM Homebrew!

> If you want to build the libraries from source instead of using Homebrew, you can pass `-DES_USE_SYSTEM_LIBRARIES=OFF` to CMake when configuring.

Reviewer 3: Can we leave a comment that this should also be tried when errors occur with any includes (openal for example)?

Author: We should probably figure out why it fails to properly include OpenAL instead.

Replace `<preset>` with one of the following presets:

- Windows: `clang-cl` (builds with Clang for Windows), `mingw` (builds with MinGW), `mingw32` (builds with x86 MinGW)
- MacOS: `macos` or `macos-arm` (builds with the default compiler, for x64 and ARM64 respectively)
- Linux: `linux` (builds with the default compiler)

### Using an IDE

Most IDEs have CMake support, and can be used to build the game. We recommend using [Visual Studio Code](#visual-studio-code).

#### Visual Studio Code

After installing VS Code, install the [C/C++](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode.cpptools) and [CMake Tools](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode.cmake-tools) extensions, and open the project folder under File -> Open Folder.

You'll be asked to select a preset. Select the one you want (see the list above in the previous section for help). If you get asked to configure the project, click on Yes. You can use the bar at the very bottom to select between different configurations (Debug/Release), build, start the game, and execute the unit tests. On the left you can click on the test icon to run individual integration tests.

#### Visual Studio

> We recommend to use [Visual Studio 2022](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/downloads/#visual-studio-community-2022), because of its better CMake integration. Once you have installed Visual Studio, you can simply open the root folder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We recommend using [Visual Studio 2022](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/downloads/#visual-studio-community-2022) or newer, because of its better CMake integration. Once you have installed Visual Studio, you can simply open the root folder.
```

With `<preset>` being one of the available presets (see above for a list). For Windows for example you'd want `mingw`. Now there will be a Code::Blocks project inside `build\mingw`.

> ### Building with XCode

Reviewer: Is it not possible to build with clang in CodeBlocks on Windows?
If mingw is the only option, clarifying near the beginning of the section that this can only be done with those build tools on Windows is important, I think.

Author: It is possible to use clang with CodeBlocks :)

## Building with XCode
### Building with XCode

If you want to use the XCode IDE, from the root of the project folder execute:

```bash
$ cmake --preset macos -G Xcode # macos-arm for Apple Silicon
$ cmake -G Xcode --preset macos # macos-arm for Apple Silicon
```

The XCode project is located in the `build/` directory.

> 

Reviewer 2: Is this intentional?

Author: yes
